Amherst Embassy key events

31 July, secret meeting of British officials on ship off coast of Macau
11 August, Amherst arrives on the HMS Alceste off the coast of northern China and is escorted to Dagu by Chinese ships
13 August, official banquet at Tianjin
29 August, early morning, Amherst arrives at Yuanming Garden
29 August, Amherst is expelled from Beijing
28 January 1817, the embassy party reaches Canton after a long journey overland. HMS Alceste is refused permission to 

Journey out of China via Canton - on the way, British officials saw extreme rural proverty (exacerbated by Sumbawa eruption) and this may have influenced future assumptions about China.

Potentially if the embassy goes well in game, British officials will maintain respectful attitude to China and later struggles can be avoided to some extent (although internal political and economic troubles will remain and potentially worsen as for the Ottomans)

Historian Eun Kyung-min says that diplomats sent from England mostly saw the kowtow as an acceptable formality whereas EIC staff at Canton saw it as a sign of servility improper for a British official. The 1792-4 Macartney Embassy had achieved little in real terms but left a good impression of British "manners, temper and discipline" which probably influenced expectations on both sides. Macartney had been permitted to bow and go down on one knee in the British style instead of kowtowing. However, the Jiaqing Emperor may have been more resolute in requiring Amherst to kowtow precisely because his father had allowed Macartney not to.

British diplomats in their own accounts of the embassy distinguished the rude "Tartar" nobles from the civil Chinese officials they met. Staunton called the royals "the puffed-up Tartar family on the throne" Amherst called the court "the Tartar Court" and the kowtow a "Tartar ceremony".
They interpreted officials' poor treatment of them as a result of fear of imperial backlash rather than an irredeemable failure of the Chinese.

Canton system - European traders could only do business with chartered merchants (the Cohong) in their own languages via official Chinese linguists and between the months of November and March. In March they had to return to Macau or to Europe until November. They were not allowed in the walled city of Guangzhou proper and had to stay in a 400x300 yard space on the shorefront. The Chief Superintendent of Customs (or Hoppo in pidgin) was the Emperor's representative at the port for a 3-year term which was usually purchased (he'd be a Cohong merchant himself) and had power to bypass the viceroy, so European merchants were subject to both authorities and had no recourse for any grievances but had to pay heavy bribes and surtaxes.

Complexity in Amherst's mission over whether the King/Parliament or the EIC was being represented, with instructions received from both. However, Whitehall started the process of putting the embassy team together.

When preparing to depart for China, Amherst read through reports from two Russian embassies to the Qing court (Golovkin and Ismailov), as well as Macartney. He also read letters and reports from Christian missionaries at Beijing on their views about the failure of Macartney's embassy and what could be done to make Amherst's a success, and the latest intelligence from British agents at Canton (6+ months out of date by this point).

The Ismailov Embassy in 1719-22 had been seen as a great success - Ismailov had initially refused to kowtow but after a week of negotiation he agreed to do so when first meeting the Kangxi Emperor, on the condition that any future Chinese ambassador would follow Russian ceremonies in return. Following this, Ismailov was warmly received and allowed to stay for three months. In fact the Qing ambassador Toshi, sent to Moscow in 1731, apparently kowtowed to Empress Anna - implying recognition of Russia as an equal partner, an empire with its own rightful sphere - and so did Desin, ambassador to St Petersburg in 1732.

However, the Golovkin Embassy in 1806-07 was expelled from China after Golovkin refused to kowtow to a Qing general representing the Emperor, and its gifts were not accepted.

Amherst feared that kowtowing would damage Britain's reputation in Europe and India, but probably didn't know that Papal and Portuguese envoys had always agreed to kowtow, viewing it as an essentially meaningless ceremony, so him doing it wouldn't have much negative resonance in Europe. The Dutch ambassador in 1795 had kowtowed many times but been granted no concessions and treated poorly.

Amherst made a special note that his Embassy would be subject to constant surveillance where its "appearance, deportment and conversation" and "Every thing they say & do" would be "minutely reported & remembered" and brought to the attention of the emperor.

Westphalian diplomacy rested on the idea that the ambassador represented his sovereign, so the kowtow could arguably be seen as an unacceptable humiliation from the British perspective. Qing attitudes weren't adjusted to the idea that the Emperor's sphere of influence had a border or that it might shrink.

UK government made an estimated 4 million GBP yearly from taxes on tea sales at the time.

Lord Buckinghamshire, head of the EIC board of directors, died 2 days before the Amherst embassy was set to depart from Portsmouth. He was replaced by Amherst's close friend George Canning.

EIC urgent decisions would be made by a Secret Committee of 3-4 members in London, and ships took six months to relay their decisions to the EIC officials (aka Supercargoes) at Canton.

Altercations between British and French representatives in the Pearl River Delta during the Napoleonic wars had caused Chinese officials to be extra suspicious of British motives. In 1799 French and Spanish attacks on EIC ships had prompted the introduction of the British convoy system on the route to Saint Helena. In 1802 the Governor-General of Bengal sent troops to occupy Macau following a French-Portuguese treaty banning British ships from Portuguese ports. Portuguese officials at Macau stopped the British from landing, and the Jiaqing Emperor ordered the British warships to leave Chinese waters but they refused and trade was suspended until British ships withdrew following news of the Treaty of Amiens.
Without the treaty, Lord Wellesley might have ordered the seizure of Macau which would likely have irreparably damaged Chinese perceptions of Britain, although the officers at the scene might not have obeyed his order knowing it would be disastrous.
Qing also had strong distrust of France due to the disruption caused by the Napoleonic Wars to other Europeans' trade in China, and the diplomatic incidents which had ensued.

Portuguese officials at Macau (who had a longstanding relationship with the Chinese authorities, having been there since the Ming) around this time had spread distrust towards British merchants, highlighting the EIC's "captious and deceitful" masquerading of military men as merchants.

British Admiral Drury did occupy Macau in 1808, with 300 soldiers from Bengal, against the wishes of both Chinese and Portuguese authorities. Trade at Canton was suspended. After the viceroy of Liangguang refused to meet with Drury to negotiate lifting the suspension of trade, Drury took three heavy ships up the river in an attempt to intimidate the Chinese into allowing trade to continue, but was met by a much stronger Chinese fleet which fired warning shots and injured a British sailor. Drury ordered his men to return fire but they disobeyed, and the British ships ended up retreating towards the sea. After protracted negotiations, Drury withdrew his troops from Macau.

The Jiaqing Emperor issued an edict following the 1808 occupation of Macau, dismissing British fears of French aggression as "we would immediately send our mighty army to suppress and annihilate [the French] in order to maintain our maritime defence."

Between 1794 and 1816, the UK had grown more nationalistic with increasing veneration of King George III as the father of the nation. "Affection for the monarch" became crucial to British identity in reaction to the overthrow of the French monarchy. Following victories over France in 1814 and 1815, Britain saw itself as the world's leading power and would not bow to any foreign ruler - French, Russian, Chinese or "Tartar".

British troops had occupied Nepal, a Qing tributary, in 1814 and the embassy needed a leader "best adapted to the feeling and taste of the Chinese ... of high Rank, and of Military character, and also of a pre-possessing appearance" to charm and impress the Emperor sufficiently. High rank meant not-Staunton. "the person selected by his Royal Highness the Prince Regent to be placed at the head of the Commission, and to be the bearer of the letter addressed by HRH the Prince Regent to the Emperor of China, should, as in the Government of India, be authorized to act upon his own responsibility upon any points of difference between him and the other Commissioners."

Macartney's embassy had included scientists and mathematicians sent to charm and impress the Qing court as well as to collect useful information. Amherst's embassy had the eccentric scholar George Staunton as second commissioner, but otherwise mainly included EIC men who were concerned with Britain's pragmatic material interests. The delegation as a whole had a deep respect for the British monarchy. Amherst was from the Court of St James's and had experience as envoy to the Two Sicilies, so was used to European diplomatic procedures. He was not willing to be seen as a minor tributary envoy. He was willing to see the Qing as an equal partner, however.

George Staunton was posted with the EIC at Canton between 1800 and 1817. "His shyness, social ineptness and intense dislike of the boisterous drinking culture of the British Factory, notable at the time of his early years at Canton, resulted in his taking refuge in the study of Chinese law, literature and Mandarin." John Barrow, friend and mentor of Staunton, was most crucial in the decision to dispatch an embassy to Beijing, having received many reports and assessments from Staunton.

"Staunton enjoyed a reputation as Britain’s leading sinologist with the publication in 1810 of his translation of the Chinese penal code." He had a systematic network of informants while at Canton, including high-ranking mandarins and Catholic missionaries operating in the north, and so was uniquely placed among British officials to understand Chinese systems and attitudes, although his main source of info was the Beijing Gazette which arrived at Canton every week and provided "insight into the policy of the Government" although it focused more on literary wit.

He hoped he himself would be appointed as the head of an embassy to Beijing, and advocated this in 1800-01 and 1809-10. He suggested that the British King send a letter to the Emperor with an ambassador every year by the first ship. This did not happen. George III did not even send a letter to congratulate the Jiaqing Emperor on his accession, although he did send a letter from George III and gifts valued at £2,176 in 1803-04 to placate the Chinese authorities over the incident at Macau in 1802. Staunton also believed that Britain might be granted a perpetual residency at Beijing given the positive impression the Macartney Embassy had made, despite this not being allowed to Korea or other nearby tributaries. The EIC's Court of Directors dismissed these proposals, preferring the status quo. "I am sorry to find how little disposed the Minds of the Directors and of others in power are to the idea of a second Embassy … one of the Directors thought it best to 'Let the Government of China alone.'"

Staunton had been present at the Macartney embassy as a child, spoke to the Qianlong Emperor in Mandarin and received a silk purse as a gift from the Emperor's own hands. When Staunton arrived in 1800 aged 19, having been appointed by the EIC, he was still famous and was greeted by the head of the Catholic mission in Macau and then two leading Cohong merchants at Canton. However, he believed his fame became a problem for him later - local merchants and officials were wary of dealing with him as he was the only British official who could exercise "checks upon their conduct".

Around 1800 Staunton heard from Fr. Marchini that the Jiaqing Emperor was more favourable towards Europeans than his father and that the death of Heshen might signal a seachange in China's foreign relations. He wrote urging for a new embassy to be sent. He also mentioned the new viceroy (Changlin? 1802-03) as kind and easier to deal with than his predecessor Jiqing. Staunton hoped that Portuguese missionaries could help him gain a favourable audience at the Qing court, but found they had no "talents or capacity" to do so.

Staunton became friends with Songyun, viceroy of Liangguang in 1811, who he described as having a "strain of liberality scarcely to be expected in a Tartar or a Chinese" and a "most friendly and gentleman-like manner." According to Staunton, Songyun called himself "very much the friend" of the British generally. But when at a formal dinner with some other dignitaries, Songyun asked Staunton to "bend the knee" before them (unclear whether this means kowtow or just going down on one knee) and Staunton refused "as our English customs forbab [sic] it." However, Songyun remained good friends with Staunton and invited him to another 9 formal dinners and conferences. 

(Songyun was soon moved back to a position in Beijing, and is governor-general of Yili in 1815)

When Staunton spoke about the need to send another British embassy to Beijing, Songyun said "The Emperor knows it is a long way, and does not wish you to trouble yourselves. Besides the Climate does not agree with you; you may catch infectious Distempers. No! Your Nation must not send an Embassy. I will not allow it. It is out of the Question and you must not think of it."

In 1813 the Jiaqing Emperor issued an edict proposing that the Cohong be disbanded and the Canton trade be placed under sole supervision of its two most prominent merchants, but the EIC negotiated for this policy to be dropped.

A most serious dispute at this time followed the actions of a British man-of-war, HMS Doris, during the 1814 trading season at the time of the Anglo-American War (1812-14). The Doris had blockaded American shipping in Chinese territorial waters and illegally brought a captured American ship into the Pearl River. The viceroy informed the President of the Select Committee, John Elphinstone: "When two small countries [Great Britain and the United States] have petty quarrels overseas, the Celestial Empire is not concerned with them. However, when their ships enter territorial waters of the Interior [the Pearl River], they must obey and respect the prohibitions of the Celestial Empire … If [Elphinstone] dares to disobey us, then not only shall we destroy their warships, but we shall also suspend their trade."

In retaliation for the Doris incident, Chinese linguist at the EIC factory Li Huaiyuan was arrested and banished to Yili. "It may be observed that intrusion is a very light term for the entry without notice or cause assigned of a police officer with his retinue, into a residence immediately distinguished by the national flag, and hitherto considered by foreigners as an inviolable sanctuary. If the inviolability of the British Factory were not maintained - what would become of the security of other foreign residences of less distinction and pretensions?" said Staunton. This was an immediate cause of the British decision to send another embassy, which put it on a more complicated footing.

"I was compelled ... to break off the negotiation, to strike the British flag, and to retire with the whole body of British subjects from Canton; and that it was only when our ships were upon the point of sailing through the Bocca Tigris, and thus finally quitting the port, that I was overtaken by such a conciliatory overture from the Viceroy as warranted me in returning to Canton and renewing the negotiation."

The Jiaqing Emperor issued an edict in January 1815 rebuking Staunton by name: "There is an English barbarian, Sidangdong, who previously came to the imperial capital at the time his country presented tribute, was young and crafty, and throughout his return journey drew maps of all strategic spots ... he passed through. After he arrived at Canton he did not return to his native country, but has lived in Macau for twenty years ... Barbarians who come to Canton ask his advice and follow his suggestions. Probably in the long run he will make trouble."

There had been an attempted assassination of the Emperor in 1813 which probably made him more suspicious of foreign agents like Staunton. Robert Morrison of the London Missionary Society, later chief translator for the Amherst embassy, wrote to Staunton in 1815: "Immured in his palace, distrustful of all around him; a large number of persons denounced as rebel leaders not yet taken; he supposes that plans against his life and throne are carrying on, and may burst forth suddenly, as the last convulsion did. In this state of mind some designing villain brings your name before him, says that you took maps of the country twenty years ago; that the encroachments of the English bringing ships of war, bringing troops, entering the river, and attacking the people of other countries, &c., were acts all committed by your instigation! What then must His Majesty have thought with his fears already so much excited?"

Davis, 1836: "The conduct and disposition of the Chinese government for some time past had been such, as to prove that the commercial interests of [Great Britain] in China were exposed to the utmost hazard from the chance of perpetual interruption at the will of a capricious and despotic set of delegates, who kept the court of Peking in profound ignorance of their own oppressive and arbitrary conduct towards the Company’s trade ... To these circumstances are to be attributed the Embassy of Lord Amherst in 1816 ... which object was to secure, if possible, the commerce of Great Britain upon a solid and equitable footing under the cognizance of the emperor, and with the advantage of a ready appeal to him in case of need."

Staunton first learnt that an Embassy was being contemplated in a personal letter from John Barrow, dated 10 April 1815, which he received in September 1815. His reaction was far from enthusiastic. Another Embassy, in his personal view, was "a measure about which I have for some time ceased to be at all anxious and am so much aware of the risk of bad management, that I rather wish upon the whole that it might be abandoned. If however it is otherwise determined, it will of course command my best exertions and services. Whenever anything is settled, I trust due notice will be given us here, that we may be prepared accordingly." Barrow didn't know of the Emperor's mistrust towards Staunton.

Amherst’s decision to appoint Staunton as his number two, in Tuck’s view, "doomed the Embassy from the start."

Britain feared that France would regain and surpass its previous influence in China, especially with continued presence of Jesuit missionaries in Beijing (although Fr. Lamiot, head of the Jesuit mission, had been in regular friendly correspondence with Staunton, and in fact there were only 5 Jesuits left in Beijing).

The embassy was not to make any new demands but only to negotiate for existing privileges to be safeguarded and clarified.

Stated goals of the Amherst Embassy:

1. For the privileges of the EIC to be more accurately defined and detailed.
2. To ensure trade security against sudden and capricious interruptions.
3. Freedom from the interference of Chinese government officers in the Factory. The freedom to hire Chinese servants and an exemption from abusive, contemptuous or insolent treatment from Chinese functionaries.
4. To open a channel of communication between members of the Factory and some public tribunal at Peking, either a British resident or by written representations in the Chinese language. And the right to use the Chinese language in all addresses and representations to the local government.
5. To give an explanation of the “Affair of the Doris” or any other subject of a political nature on which it may be expedient to touch.

Amherst was given a budget of 20,000 GBP (around 2 million in today's money) the same as Macartney had received, plus expenses (much greater than Macartney's, mostly for alcohol).

Key members of the embassy:
WP Amherst, GT Staunton, Henry Ellis (illegitimate son of Lord Buckinghamshire, whose experience of Persian court protocol was supposed to help the embassy get on in China), John Elphinstone (12th Lord Elphinstone)

Gifts were badly chosen - based on Regency British aristocratic taste, little thought for Chinese food and drink culture in selection of tableware.
Lots of expensive wine. Maybe this was a good choice, as it would be different from what the Emperor normally received as tribute, but Jiaqing was also described as frugal and disliking excessive luxury, so maybe he'd have been offended.
Scandinavian furs and Spanish cloth - again probably good choices, but would need to be accompanied by a suitably subservient ambassador.
British manufactured goods, including penknives. Probably a nice curio if the embassy had gone well, but not likely to impress.



Trivia:
British naval officer James Johnson in 1804 wrote of Canton "the din of the Chinese language on every side; the clangour of their gongs, the shrill noise of their music, the glare of their fire works, all combine to form a scene so novel and striking, that the impression which it leaves on one’s memory, can hardly ever be erased afterwards."