China in 1815 (the 19th year of the Jiaqing Era) is represented by the Empire of the Great Qing with its numerous vassals and viceroyalties. Chinese silk, tea and porcelain can be found in households around the globe, and the Empire's scholarly culture remains the standard its neighbours strive to follow. But a steadily rising population combined with an inefficient semi-feudal system of land ownership has led to unemployment and famine, while increasing reliance on foreign silver has caused alarming devaluation of the domestically mined and minted copper coins used for everyday trade. Playing as the Great Qing, or one of its devolved administrations, you are unlikely to find easy answers to these problems. Economic difficulties are contributing to a rising wave of Han nationalism against the Manchu political elite, with many hushed voices talking about the withdrawal of the Mandate of Heaven. Any moves to correct this situation will have to be made with caution and long-term thinking, and changes may not be well received by stakeholders.

The widespread White Lotus Rebellion of 1808, and its 1813 aftershock (in which 200 radical Buddhists from the Eight Trigrams sect stormed the Forbidden Palace itself with the help of disgruntled eunuchs - only defeated after the Emperor's eldest son fired into the crowd with his ornamental musket), has dented the imperial Aisin Gioro clan's sense of invincibility. The attempt on the Emperor's life has left him troubled and changed. He spends his days pacing in his chambers, and his nights without sleep. His fragile mental state has led him to order a crackdown on all unorthodox religious activities, including the more or less summary execution of several hundred Chinese Christians.

Internationally, the Joseon Kingdom (aka Korea) remains the Qing's most loyal tributary. It's a symbiotic relationship: Joseon kings derive legitimacy at home from their close relationship to the Son of Heaven, while being a useful partner for the Qing in trade, academia and military matters. Other important Qing tributaries include the kingdoms of Ryukyu, Nepal and Viet Nam, as well as the Tuvan tribes of Uriankhai who enjoy a special status. Meanwhile, the loyalty of imperial generals and viceroys in the frontier regions is a testament to the Emperor's wisdom and virtue. The vast plains and mountains of Mongolia are entirely under Qing control, divided between direct imperial rule, military rule under the Governor-General of Uliastai, and religious rule under the Tibetan monks of Urga guided by the imperial Amban. To the west, the Governor-General of Yili rules over a diverse frontier society of settlers and tribespeople. South of Yili are the Six Cities (Altishahr) of the Tarim Basin, a confederacy of Uyghur city-states under Qing protection. South of the Altishahr lies Tibet, where the Lhasa government (aka Ganden Phodrang) is a trusted ally and nominal protectorate of the Qing. Present relations with Russia are no longer the friendly ones of the Kangxi Era, and may be about to sour even further. The situation has more than one side, and as the Qing you may or may not be able to restore relations with Russia in the long term. Recent reports suggest that the Khwadja's supporters may be stirring once again among the Kirghiz tribes and in Altishahr's less civilised corners, while out in the wild west beyond Kashgar the rebellious petty khanate of Khoqand has stopped sending tribute and started sending raiding parties into Qing subject lands.

We have chosen to represent two out of the eight regional civil viceroyalties within China as distinct tags: Yun(nan)-Gui(zhou) and Shaan(xi)-Gan(su). These two were chosen because their territories are more or less geographically remote, so lacked regular imperial oversight (Yun-Gui is recorded as having the same viceroy for 16 years at this time while the normal term limit was 3 years), and because especially in the case of Shaan-Gan the territories administered by the viceroy cover multiple provinces which it would be wrong to merge in game. Other viceroys were important political figures and exercised great autonomy in certain spheres (in particular those of Liangguang in foreign trade, of Liangjiang in domestic trade and of Zhili in military power), but for the purposes of this mod we have chosen to represent them in other ways. Taiwan, an island loosely administered by the governor of Fujian whose main task was preventing further Han settlement (in order to prevent ethnic tensions with natives which imperial authorities would have to solve) is represented here as a distinct tag, a territory under Qing suzerainty. This territory status in the mod isn't 100% decided and any suggestions on how best to represent 1815 Taiwan would be appreciated.

The demands of the barbarian merchants at Guangzhou seem to increase with their numbers - France and Britain both clamour for special trading privileges. In recent years they have even dared to fight among themselves in the Qing's waterways. Now news reaches Beijing that the barbarian princes of the far west have made peace among themselves after more than ten years of war... perhaps they have begun to understand the value of a harmonious society? A few months after the start of the game, the second British Embassy to China will be announced, and in August 1816 (if you as the Qing allow it) the Embassy will arrive. How you and your officials interact with the British diplomats at this early stage may affect the course of history in complex ways.